---
layout: post
title: "Special Feature: Lucky & Wild - OOO"
date: 2011-02-22 13:00:53
permalink: luckyandwild
---
Most bands can be summed up in a paragraph and many in a single sentence. Compression to such extremes is rarely advisable since it leaves no room context, artistry, emotion, and all those nuances that draw us to music in the first place. Nevertheless, it can be effective when you need to quickly convey the gist of an artist, especially if your audience has enough background to intuit the rest. Just as skimming the sparknotes won't make you enjoy Ulysses, the single-sentence summary won't make you enjoy a band, but both are sufficient if your goal is basic comprehension.

Have you heard about **Lucky & Wild**? Well, that's a long story, and the sparknotes haven't been published. It's telling that I couldn't find a way to summarize **Lucky & Wild** in a sentence, paragraph, or even in a 1000-word review. I couldn't even select two tracks to adequately represent it. In my defense, neither could those involved in the project. Therefore, we decided to forgo the standard 7-inch in favor of posting the full _album_\-if that's even the right word for it. You'll have to experience it for yourself.

Perhaps the first key to understanding **Lucky & Wild** is to realize what it isn't-an artist. Lucky & Wild should be approached as another entity altogether, for which there's little precedent. The project is a collaboration between musician **Ben Seretan** and visual artist **Angus McCullough**. Seretan is best known as the vocalist and guitarist of **[Duchampion](http://www.myspace.com/duchampionband)**, a Brooklyn-based band that draws on rock, punk, and shoegaze. I won't delve into detail now because we hope to highlight Duchampion in a future 7-inch. McCullough's [art and design](http://www.angusmccullough.com/) span several mediums. A common thread throughout his work is his uncanny ability to evoke character, emotion, and storyline through unconventional means. Seretan and McCullough also enlisted the help of filmmaker **Spencer Sheridan** of **[No Face](http://nofaceperformance.org/)**, a Philadelphia-based performance group, and released their... err, whatever you want to call it, definitely not album... with the support of **[Mighty Kitten Records](http://www.mightykitten.com/)** under the Creative Commons License.

Collaborations between musicians and visual artists invariably spawn cool results and **Lucky & Wild** is no exception to this rule. Still, Lucky & Wild is not the usual breed of cool. The brew is far stranger than the ingredients would indicate. Let's discuss the recent release **OOO**, an unpronounceable title which **Seretan** describes as a _"typographic and computer friendly way to represent three periods, three circles, etc."_ and which is anything but an album. In addition to eleven audio files, it includes a [video](http://lucky-and-wild.com/video.html), photos, drawings, cryptic graphs supplemented by a series of 'renderings'  that pose more questions than they resolve, excerpts from emails between **Seretan** and **McCullough**, a Cherokee fable and other obscure literary selections-all vaguely related to the theme of _hummingbirds_, production notes as incomprehensible as Gertrude Stein's diary, and copious bibliographical credits.

Of all these, the [video](http://lucky-and-wild.com/video.html) provides the best point of access-insofar as it's a medium we can wrap our minds around and appreciate with relative ease. Trippy visuals draw us into the dark universe of **Seretan's** music, where even the most self-assured will quickly begin to doubt their own sanity. It's like looking at a series of inkblots that seem too grotesque to be coincidental. Is your therapist playing a trick on you? However, the imagery is sufficiently abstract that you won't be able to say for sure whether the shapes swelling and dissipating in the smoke are real or just figments of your fucked up imagination.

For those who wish to delve deeper, the correspondence between **Seretan** and **McCullough** provides biographical and philosophical context. Seretan explains his inspiration for the work-hanging around an abandoned arcade in triple-digit heat, surrounded by the sporadic blinks and flashes of glitchy machines, and taking in the _"ghost echoes of lost decades of fun."_ This was impetus for the pixilated arcade game motif, as well as the name **Lucky & Wild**. He also alludes to Marconi's theory that sound never truly dissipates, a cool idea to keep in the back of your mind as you sift through the content.

The other major theme of the release-hummingbirds-is also addressed. **Seretan** recounts a recent visit to the UC Santa Cruz Arboretum where he describes a _"kick-ass hummingbird trail."_ This may be the first time such words have been used to describe a hummingbird trail, but Seretan elaborates convincingly enough to diffuse any doubts regarding their propriety. _"Hummingbirds must see us humans as these huge, loafing, slow-moving monsters as they flitter about...surprisingly apt description of how my life here has felt."_

Now that I've provided the background on **Lucky & Wild**, I'll leave you to explore at your own pace. There may, in fact, be a method to the madness. A few of the images and poems seem to carry encrypted messages but it might be purely aesthetic. I haven't been able to crack the code-if it exists at all-and even with an entire sheet of LSD to inspire me, I doubt I'd get any closer to a definitive truth.

Because **Lucky & Wild** packages **OOO** as a single-click free download, we're tempted to dismiss it as the sort of work we can experience passively. You can listen to the music. You can watch the movie. You can read the words. However, to realize the full potential of OOO, you'll need to take a more active role. OOO is avant-garde installation art. Think of it as an exhibit in a box. If you were a curator at MOMA, how would you install it? Now take that mentality and apply it to your apartment. Host a party. Print out several copies of the text and give one to each of your guests as they arrive. Distribute pot brownies, acid punch, etc. Release live hummingbirds. Turn off all the lights. Loop the audio in surround sound. Project the images and videos on the walls and ceiling. If you don't have a projector, a laptop will suffice. The more laptops, the better, so ask your friends to help. Position them strategically throughout the room. Recruit a performer to recite a dramatic rendition of the parable of the Crane and the Hummingbird as the party unfolds. Enjoy, and don't forget to invite your friends at Ampeater! Nate Greenberg
  
  